= How to bind a JS library for OCaml

== Accessing JavaScript properties

=== Global variables

Global JavaScript variables are properties of the global object. Use
{{{Js.Unsafe.global}}} to access them ({{{window}}} in browsers,
{{{globalThis}}} in Node.js):

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Access document *)
let doc : Dom_html.document Js.t = Js.Unsafe.global##.document

(* Read and write a custom global *)
let get_config () : config Js.t = Js.Unsafe.global##.myAppConfig
let set_config (x : config Js.t) = Js.Unsafe.global##.myAppConfig := x
>>

You can also use {{{Js.Unsafe.js_expr}}} for any JavaScript expression:
<<code language="ocaml"|
let v = (Js.Unsafe.js_expr "window")##.document
>>

Be careful: both {{{Js.Unsafe.global}}} and {{{Js.Unsafe.js_expr}}} are untyped.
Verify the library documentation before writing type annotations.

=== Untyped property access

When a property is missing from the OCaml interface (e.g., dynamically added
by a library), use {{{Js.Unsafe.coerce}}} for untyped access:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Read a property *)
let value = (Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.someProp

(* Write a property *)
(Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.someProp := v
>>

For type-safe access, define a class type for the extended object or wrap
the unsafe access in getter/setter functions.

== Binding a JS object

Use OCaml class types to describe the shape of JavaScript objects. Each
{{{method}}} declaration represents either a property or a method of the JS
object.

=== Property types

|= Type |= Access |= OCaml usage |
| {{{t readonly_prop}}} | read only | {{{obj##.prop}}} |
| {{{t writeonly_prop}}} | write only | {{{obj##.prop := v}}} |
| {{{t prop}}} | read/write | both |
| {{{t1 -> t2 -> ... -> t meth}}} | method | {{{obj##meth arg1 arg2}}} |
| {{{t optdef_prop}}} | optional read | {{{obj##.prop}}} returns {{{t Optdef.t}}} |

=== Example

Given a JavaScript object:
<<code language="javascript"|
{
  name: "example",           // read-only string
  count: 42,                 // read-write number
  greet: function(x) { ... } // method
}
>>

Bind it as:
<<code language="ocaml"|
class type myObj = object
  method name : Js.js_string Js.t Js.readonly_prop
  method count : int Js.prop
  method greet : Js.js_string Js.t -> unit Js.meth
end
>>

=== Method name mangling

OCaml method names are transformed to JavaScript names using underscore
conventions. When accessing a field of an object, the name given in OCaml
is transformed by:
1. Removing a leading underscore (if present)
2. Removing all characters starting from the last underscore

This enables:
- **Capitalized names**: Use {{{_Foo}}} to refer to JavaScript's {{{Foo}}}
- **Reserved words**: Use {{{_type}}} to refer to JavaScript's {{{type}}}
- **Method overloading**: Use {{{foo_int}}} and {{{foo_string}}} for the same {{{foo}}} method

==== Examples

<<code language="ocaml"|
class type canvas = object
  (* All three refer to the same JS method: drawImage *)
  method drawImage :
      imageElement Js.t -> int -> int -> unit Js.meth
  method drawImage_withSize :
      imageElement Js.t -> int -> int -> int -> int -> unit Js.meth
  method drawImage_fromCanvas :
      canvasElement Js.t -> int -> int -> unit Js.meth
end
>>

==== Full naming rules

<<code language="ocaml"|
class type example = object
  (* All of these refer to JS field [meth] *)
  method meth : ..
  method meth_int : ..
  method _meth_ : ..
  method _meth_aa : ..

  (* All of these refer to JS field [meth_a] *)
  method meth_a_int : ..
  method _meth_a_ : ..
  method _meth_a_b : ..

  (* Refer to [Meth] (capitalized) *)
  method _Meth : ..

  (* Refer to [_meth] (leading underscore in JS) *)
  method __meth : ..

  (* Refer to [_] *)
  method __ : ..
end
>>

=== Binding constants from a class

For JavaScript constants like {{{SomeLib.SomeClass.VALUE_A}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Type definition *)
class type someClass = object
  method _VALUE_A : int Js.readonly_prop
  method _VALUE_B : int Js.readonly_prop
end

(* Get the class object *)
let someClass : someClass Js.t =
  (Js.Unsafe.js_expr "SomeLib")##._SomeClass

(* Access constants *)
let value_a = someClass##._VALUE_A
>>

== Type conversions

OCaml and JavaScript have different representations for basic types. Use
these functions to convert between them.

=== Strings

OCaml strings and JavaScript strings have different encodings. Use {{{Js.string}}}
and {{{Js.to_string}}} for UTF-8 encoded OCaml strings:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* OCaml string -> JS string *)
let js_str : Js.js_string Js.t = Js.string "Hello"

(* JS string -> OCaml string *)
let ocaml_str : string = Js.to_string js_str
>>

For binary data (bytes 0-255), use {{{Js.bytestring}}} and {{{Js.to_bytestring}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let js_bytes = Js.bytestring "\x00\x01\x02"
let ocaml_bytes = Js.to_bytestring js_bytes
>>

=== Booleans

JavaScript booleans are not OCaml booleans. Use {{{Js.bool}}} and {{{Js.to_bool}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let js_true : bool Js.t = Js._true        (* or Js.bool true *)
let js_false : bool Js.t = Js._false      (* or Js.bool false *)
let ocaml_bool : bool = Js.to_bool js_true
>>

=== Numbers

OCaml integers can be used directly. For floats, use {{{Js.float}}} and
{{{Js.to_float}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Integers work directly *)
let count : int = obj##.count

(* Floats need conversion *)
let js_num : Js.number Js.t = Js.number_of_float 3.14
let ocaml_float : float = Js.float_of_number js_num
>>

=== Arrays

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* OCaml array -> JS array *)
let js_arr : int Js.js_array Js.t = Js.array [| 1; 2; 3 |]

(* JS array -> OCaml array *)
let ocaml_arr : int array = Js.to_array js_arr
>>

=== Summary table

|= OCaml type |= JS type |= OCaml → JS |= JS → OCaml |
| {{{string}}} | String | {{{Js.string}}} | {{{Js.to_string}}} |
| {{{string}}} (bytes) | String | {{{Js.bytestring}}} | {{{Js.to_bytestring}}} |
| {{{bool}}} | Boolean | {{{Js.bool}}} | {{{Js.to_bool}}} |
| {{{int}}} | Number | (direct) | (direct) |
| {{{float}}} | Number | {{{Js.float}}} | {{{Js.to_float}}} |
| {{{'a array}}} | Array | {{{Js.array}}} | {{{Js.to_array}}} |

== Handling null and undefined

JavaScript has two "missing value" types: {{{null}}} and {{{undefined}}}.
Js_of_ocaml represents these with distinct types.

=== {{{Js.Opt}}} for nullable values ({{{null}}})

Use {{{Js.Opt}}} for values that may be {{{null}}} (e.g., DOM methods that
return {{{null}}} when an element is not found):

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Check if null *)
let is_present = Js.Opt.test value

(* Convert to OCaml option *)
let opt : element Js.t option = Js.Opt.to_option value

(* Handle both cases *)
let result = Js.Opt.case value
  (fun () -> (* null *) "not found")
  (fun v -> (* has value *) process v)

(* Get value or raise exception *)
let v = Js.Opt.get value (fun () -> failwith "was null")

(* Create nullable values *)
let some_val : element Js.t Js.opt = Js.some element
let null_val : element Js.t Js.opt = Js.null
>>

=== {{{Js.Optdef}}} for optional values ({{{undefined}}})

Use {{{Js.Optdef}}} for values that may be {{{undefined}}} (e.g., optional
object properties, array access beyond bounds):

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Check if defined *)
let is_defined = Js.Optdef.test value

(* Convert to OCaml option *)
let opt : config Js.t option = Js.Optdef.to_option value

(* Handle both cases *)
let result = Js.Optdef.case value
  (fun () -> (* undefined *) default_config)
  (fun v -> (* defined *) v)

(* Create optdef values *)
let def_val : int Js.optdef = Js.def 42
let undef_val : int Js.optdef = Js.undefined
>>

=== When to use which

|= Scenario |= Type |= Example |
| DOM lookup | {{{Js.Opt}}} | {{{getElementById}}} returns {{{null}}} if not found |
| Optional property | {{{Js.Optdef}}} | Property may not exist on object |
| Array access | {{{Js.Optdef}}} | {{{Js.array_get}}} returns {{{undefined}}} for missing index |
| API returns null | {{{Js.Opt}}} | Many DOM APIs use {{{null}}} for "no value" |
| Feature detection | {{{Js.Optdef}}} | Check if method/property exists |

=== Combining with option types

Both modules provide {{{to_option}}} for idiomatic OCaml code:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let find_element id =
  Dom_html.getElementById_opt id
  |> Js.Opt.to_option

let () =
  match find_element "myId" with
  | Some el -> (* use element *)
  | None -> (* not found *)
>>

== Calling JS functions

There are three ways to call JavaScript functions, depending on how {{{this}}}
should be bound.

=== Standalone functions with {{{fun_call}}}

Use {{{Js.Unsafe.fun_call}}} for functions where {{{this}}} doesn't matter:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Equivalent to: decodeURI(s) *)
let decodeURI (s : Js.js_string Js.t) : Js.js_string Js.t =
  Js.Unsafe.fun_call
    (Js.Unsafe.js_expr "decodeURI")
    [| Js.Unsafe.inject s |]

(* Equivalent to: parseInt(s, 10) *)
let parseInt (s : Js.js_string Js.t) : int =
  Js.Unsafe.fun_call
    (Js.Unsafe.js_expr "parseInt")
    [| Js.Unsafe.inject s; Js.Unsafe.inject 10 |]
>>

=== Methods with {{{meth_call}}}

Use {{{Js.Unsafe.meth_call}}} to call a method on an object ({{{this}}} is
bound to the object):

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Equivalent to: arr.slice(1, 3) *)
let slice arr start stop =
  Js.Unsafe.meth_call arr "slice"
    [| Js.Unsafe.inject start; Js.Unsafe.inject stop |]
>>

=== Functions with explicit {{{this}}} binding

Use {{{Js.Unsafe.call}}} when you need to explicitly set {{{this}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Equivalent to: func.call(thisArg, arg1, arg2) *)
let result =
  Js.Unsafe.call func thisArg [| Js.Unsafe.inject arg1; Js.Unsafe.inject arg2 |]
>>

See the <<a_api subproject="js_of_ocaml"|module Js_of_ocaml.Js.Unsafe>> module
API for more details.

== Passing OCaml functions to JavaScript

When JavaScript code needs to call back into OCaml (e.g., event handlers,
callbacks for async operations), you must wrap OCaml functions appropriately.

=== Basic callbacks with {{{Js.wrap_callback}}}

Use {{{Js.wrap_callback}}} to wrap an OCaml function for JavaScript:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* setTimeout example *)
let set_timeout f ms =
  Js.Unsafe.global##setTimeout
    (Js.wrap_callback f)
    (Js.float ms)

let () = set_timeout (fun () -> print_endline "Hello!") 1000.
>>

{{{Js.wrap_callback}}} handles partial application correctly: if JavaScript
calls the function with fewer arguments than expected, the result is a
partially applied function.

=== Callbacks with {{{this}}} binding

Use {{{Js.wrap_meth_callback}}} when the callback needs access to {{{this}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* The first parameter receives the 'this' value *)
let callback = Js.wrap_meth_callback (fun this event ->
  let target : Dom_html.element Js.t = this in
  (* ... handle event ... *)
  Js._true)
>>

=== Strict arity callbacks

For performance-critical code, or when you don't need partial application
support, use {{{Js.Unsafe.callback}}} or {{{Js.Unsafe.callback_with_arity}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Strict callback - missing args become undefined, extra args are lost *)
let strict_cb = Js.Unsafe.callback (fun x y -> x + y)

(* Explicit arity - ensures exactly 2 arguments *)
let arity_cb = Js.Unsafe.callback_with_arity 2 (fun x y -> x + y)
>>

=== DOM event handlers

For DOM events, use {{{Dom.handler}}} or {{{Dom_html.handler}}} which
automatically wraps the function and handles the return value (returning
{{{Js._false}}} prevents the default action):

<<code language="ocaml"|
let button = Dom_html.getElementById "myButton"

let handler = Dom_html.handler (fun event ->
  Dom_html.window##alert (Js.string "Clicked!");
  Js._true (* return false to prevent default *))

button##.onclick := handler
>>

For handlers that need access to {{{this}}}, use {{{Dom.full_handler}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let handler = Dom.full_handler (fun this event ->
  let element : Dom_html.element Js.t = this in
  (* ... *)
  Js._true)
>>

=== Callbacks with variable arguments

Use {{{Js.Unsafe.callback_with_arguments}}} when the callback receives a
variable number of arguments:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let varargs_cb = Js.Unsafe.callback_with_arguments (fun args ->
  let len = args##.length in
  Printf.printf "Called with %d arguments\n" len)
>>

== Using a JS constructor

To call a JavaScript constructor (i.e., {{{new F(...)}}}), first obtain the
constructor (i.e. from the global object), then use {{{new%js}}} to instantiate it.

=== Basic usage

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* In .ml: get the constructor *)
let dateConstr : (int -> int -> int -> Js.date Js.t) Js.constr =
  Js.Unsafe.global##._Date

(* Create an instance using new%js *)
let my_date = new%js dateConstr 2024 0 15
>>

This is equivalent to:
<<code language="javascript"|
new Date(2024, 0, 15)
>>

=== Handling overloaded constructors

JavaScript constructors often accept different argument types. Since OCaml
requires fixed types, define multiple bindings for each signature:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* In .mli *)
val dateConstr : (int -> int -> int -> Js.date Js.t) Js.constr
val dateConstr_fromValue : (int -> Js.date Js.t) Js.constr
val dateConstr_fromString : (Js.js_string Js.t -> Js.date Js.t) Js.constr

(* In .ml - all point to the same JS constructor *)
let dateConstr = Js.Unsafe.global##._Date
let dateConstr_fromValue = Js.Unsafe.global##._Date
let dateConstr_fromString = Js.Unsafe.global##._Date
>>

=== Constructors from nested objects

For constructors not on the global object, bind them first:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let workerConstr : (Js.js_string Js.t -> worker Js.t) Js.constr =
  Js.Unsafe.global##._Worker

(* For nested: someLib.SomeClass *)
let someClass = (Js.Unsafe.js_expr "someLib")##._SomeClass in
new%js someClass arg1 arg2
>>

== Constructing JS objects manually

To construct a JS object without calling a constructor, use the
<<a_manual chapter="Ppx"|Ppx>> syntax extension (recommended) or
{{{Js.Unsafe.obj}}}.

=== Using the PPX syntax (recommended)

<<code language="ocaml"|
let options = object%js
  val x = 3 (* read-only prop *)
  val mutable y = 4 (* read/write prop *)
  method greet name = Js.string ("Hello " ^ Js.to_string name)
end
>>

This produces the equivalent of:
<<code language="javascript"|
{ x: 3, y: 4, greet: function(name) { return "Hello " + name; } }
>>

See the <<a_manual chapter="Ppx"|Ppx documentation>> for more details.

=== Using {{{Js.Unsafe.obj}}}

For dynamic object construction, use {{{Js.Unsafe.obj}}} with an array of
key-value pairs:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let options : < x: int Js.prop; y: int Js.prop > Js.t =
  Js.Unsafe.obj [|
    ("x", Js.Unsafe.inject 3);
    ("y", Js.Unsafe.inject 4);
  |]
>>

A common pattern is to create an empty object and set properties afterwards.
This is useful when calling JavaScript functions that expect an options object
with optional fields. Use {{{writeonly_prop}}} for the type to prevent reading
unset properties (which would return {{{undefined}}}):

<<code language="ocaml"|
class type myOptions = object
  method timeout : int Js.writeonly_prop
  method retry : bool Js.t Js.writeonly_prop
end

let call_with_options () =
  let options : myOptions Js.t = Js.Unsafe.obj [||] in
  options##.timeout := 5000;
  options##.retry := Js._true;
  some_js_function options
>>

== Check availability of methods and properties

JavaScript APIs vary across browsers and environments. A method or property
may exist in one browser but not another, or may have been added in a recent
version. Use {{{Js.Optdef}}} to safely check for and access optional members.

=== Checking if a member exists

<<code language="ocaml"|
let has_method obj = Js.Optdef.test (Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.someMethod
let has_prop obj = Js.Optdef.test (Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.someProp
>>

=== Safely accessing optional members

Use {{{Js.Optdef.to_option}}} to convert to an OCaml option:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let get_optional_method obj =
  Js.Optdef.to_option (Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.someMethod

let () =
  match get_optional_method my_obj with
  | Some f -> (* use the method *)
  | None -> (* fallback behavior *)
>>

Use {{{Js.Optdef.case}}} for inline handling:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let result =
  Js.Optdef.case (Js.Unsafe.coerce obj)##.optionalMethod
    (fun () -> (* not defined, use fallback *) default_value)
    (fun m -> (* defined, use it *) m arg1 arg2)
>>

=== Example: feature detection

<<code language="ocaml"|
let supports_fetch () =
  Js.Optdef.test Js.Unsafe.global##.fetch

let supports_local_storage () =
  Js.Optdef.test Js.Unsafe.global##.localStorage
>>

== Object property with multiple types

JavaScript APIs often use union types where a property can hold values of
different types (e.g., {{{string | Node}}} or {{{number | null}}}). Since OCaml
requires a single type, use an opaque type with runtime type checking.

=== Using {{{instanceof}}} for object types

Use {{{Js.instanceof}}} to distinguish between different object types
(e.g., DOM nodes, custom classes). Define an opaque type and cast functions:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* Opaque type representing the union: Element | Text *)
type element_or_text

class type container = object
  method child : element_or_text Js.t Js.prop
end

(* Cast functions using instanceof *)
let as_element (x : element_or_text Js.t) : Dom.element Js.t Js.opt =
  if Js.instanceof x (Js.Unsafe.global##._Element)
  then Js.some (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)
  else Js.null

let as_text (x : element_or_text Js.t) : Dom.text Js.t Js.opt =
  if Js.instanceof x (Js.Unsafe.global##._Text)
  then Js.some (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)
  else Js.null

(* Usage *)
let handle_child (container : container Js.t) =
  let child = container##.child in
  Js.Opt.case (as_element child)
    (fun () ->
      Js.Opt.case (as_text child)
        (fun () -> failwith "unexpected type")
        (fun text -> (* handle text node *)))
    (fun elem -> (* handle element *))
>>

=== Using {{{typeof}}} for primitive types

For primitive types (string, number, boolean), use {{{Js.typeof}}}:

<<code language="ocaml"|
type string_or_number

let as_string (x : string_or_number Js.t) : Js.js_string Js.t Js.opt =
  if Js.typeof x = Js.string "string"
  then Js.some (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)
  else Js.null

let as_number (x : string_or_number Js.t) : Js.number Js.t Js.opt =
  if Js.typeof x = Js.string "number"
  then Js.some (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)
  else Js.null
>>

=== Converting to OCaml variants

For cleaner OCaml code, convert the union to a variant:

<<code language="ocaml"|
type child =
  | Element of Dom.element Js.t
  | Text of Dom.text Js.t

let classify_child (x : element_or_text Js.t) : child =
  if Js.instanceof x (Js.Unsafe.global##._Element)
  then Element (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)
  else Text (Js.Unsafe.coerce x)

(* Now use pattern matching *)
let handle container =
  match classify_child container##.child with
  | Element e -> (* work with element *)
  | Text t -> (* work with text node *)
>>

== Accessing JavaScript runtime values

The {{{Jsoo_runtime.Js.runtime_value}}} function allows direct access to JavaScript
values provided by the runtime (declared with {{{//Provides:}}} directives in
JavaScript files).

<<code language="ocaml"|
external runtime_value : string -> 'a = "caml_jsoo_runtime_value"
>>

This function is useful when you need to access JavaScript values defined by an external javascript package.
and you don't want to polute the global object.

**Important**: The argument must be a **string literal**, not a variable.
The compiler will reject non-literal arguments.

=== Example

Given a JavaScript file {{{custom.js}}} linked with your program:

<<code language="javascript"|
//Provides: process
var process = "my process value";

//Provides: myConfig
var myConfig = { debug: true, version: 42 };
>>

You can access these values from OCaml:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let process_str : Js.js_string Js.t = Jsoo_runtime.Js.runtime_value "process"

let config : < debug : bool Js.t Js.prop; version : int Js.prop > Js.t =
  Jsoo_runtime.Js.runtime_value "myConfig"

let () =
  print_endline (Js.to_string process_str);
  if Js.to_bool config##.debug then
    Printf.printf "Version: %d\n" config##.version
>>
