= Error handling between OCaml and JavaScript

This page explains how exceptions propagate between OCaml and JavaScript code,
and how to properly handle errors in both directions.

== Catching JavaScript exceptions in OCaml

When JavaScript code throws an exception and it propagates to OCaml code,
it is wrapped in the {{{Js_error.Exn}}} exception.

<<code language="ocaml"|
open Js_of_ocaml

let safe_parse json_str =
  try
    Some (Js._JSON##parse (Js.string json_str))
  with Js_error.Exn err ->
    Printf.eprintf "Parse error: %s\n" (Js_error.to_string err);
    None
>>

=== Inspecting JavaScript errors

The {{{Js_error}}} module provides functions to inspect error details:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let handle_error err =
  (* Error message *)
  let msg = Js_error.message err in

  (* Error name (e.g., "TypeError", "ReferenceError") *)
  let name = Js_error.name err in

  (* Stack trace (if available) *)
  let stack = Js_error.stack err in

  Printf.eprintf "Error [%s]: %s\n" name msg;
  Option.iter (Printf.eprintf "Stack:\n%s\n") stack
>>

=== Catching specific error types

To distinguish between error types, check the error name:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let handle_js_call () =
  try
    some_js_operation ()
  with Js_error.Exn err ->
    match Js_error.name err with
    | "TypeError" -> (* handle type error *)
    | "RangeError" -> (* handle range error *)
    | "SyntaxError" -> (* handle syntax error *)
    | _ -> (* handle other errors *)
>>

== Raising JavaScript errors from OCaml

To throw a JavaScript error that JavaScript code can catch:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let validate_positive n =
  if n < 0 then
    let err = new%js Js.error_constr (Js.string "Value must be positive") in
    Js_error.raise_ (Js_error.of_error err)
  else
    n
>>

=== Creating typed errors

JavaScript has several built-in error types. You can create them using their
constructors:

<<code language="ocaml"|
(* TypeError *)
let type_error_constr : (Js.js_string Js.t -> Js.error Js.t) Js.constr =
  Js.Unsafe.global##._TypeError

let raise_type_error msg =
  let err = new%js type_error_constr (Js.string msg) in
  Js_error.raise_ (Js_error.of_error err)

(* RangeError *)
let range_error_constr : (Js.js_string Js.t -> Js.error Js.t) Js.constr =
  Js.Unsafe.global##._RangeError

let raise_range_error msg =
  let err = new%js range_error_constr (Js.string msg) in
  Js_error.raise_ (Js_error.of_error err)
>>

== Exception propagation in exported functions

When you export OCaml functions to JavaScript, uncaught OCaml exceptions will
propagate to JavaScript. However, OCaml exceptions are **not** JavaScript
{{{Error}}} objects - they are represented as JavaScript arrays.

<<code language="ocaml"|
let divide x y =
  if y = 0 then failwith "Division by zero"
  else x / y

let () = Js.export "divide" divide
>>

From JavaScript, you can catch the exception, but it won't be an {{{Error}}}:
<<code language="javascript"|
try {
  divide(10, 0);
} catch (e) {
  // e is an array, not an Error object
  // e.message is undefined
  console.log(e);  // [0, [0, "Failure", ...], "Division by zero"]
}
>>

=== Raising proper JavaScript errors

For better JavaScript interoperability, raise JavaScript errors instead of
OCaml exceptions:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let divide_safe x y =
  if y = 0 then
    let err = new%js Js.error_constr (Js.string "Division by zero") in
    Js_error.raise_ (Js_error.of_error err)
  else
    x / y

let () = Js.export "divide" divide_safe
>>

Now JavaScript receives a proper {{{Error}}}:
<<code language="javascript"|
try {
  divide(10, 0);
} catch (e) {
  console.log(e instanceof Error);  // true
  console.log(e.message);           // "Division by zero"
}
>>

== Preserving stack traces

=== Attaching JavaScript backtraces

Use {{{Js_error.attach_js_backtrace}}} to attach a JavaScript stack trace to
an OCaml exception. This is useful for debugging:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let process data =
  try
    do_something data
  with exn ->
    let exn = Js_error.attach_js_backtrace exn ~force:false in
    (* Log or rethrow with JS backtrace attached *)
    raise exn
>>

=== Extracting JavaScript backtraces

Use {{{Js_error.of_exn}}} to extract the JavaScript error from an OCaml
exception:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let log_with_backtrace exn =
  match Js_error.of_exn exn with
  | Some js_err ->
      Printf.eprintf "JS Error: %s\n" (Js_error.to_string js_err);
      Option.iter (Printf.eprintf "Stack:\n%s\n") (Js_error.stack js_err)
  | None ->
      Printf.eprintf "OCaml Error: %s\n" (Printexc.to_string exn)
>>

=== Automatic attachment of stack traces

Js_of_ocaml can automatically attach a JavaScript {{{Error}}} (which embeds the
current stack trace) when raising an OCaml exception. This happens when:

1. {{{Printexc.backtrace_status() = true}}}, **and**
2. Either:
   * The environment variable {{{OCAMLRUNPARAM}}} contains {{{b=1}}}, or
   * The program was compiled with {{{--enable with-js-error}}}

Example with environment variable:
{{{
OCAMLRUNPARAM=b=1 node program.js
}}}

Example with compiler flag:
{{{
js_of_ocaml --enable with-js-error program.byte
}}}

Unhandled OCaml exceptions will throw any attached JavaScript {{{Error}}},
allowing the browser or Node.js to display the stack trace nicely.

**Note**: Creating JavaScript {{{Error}}} objects is costly and can degrade
performance significantly. This is why automatic attachment is not enabled
by default.
