= The Js_of_ocaml library

This page describes the core concepts of the Js_of_ocaml type system for
representing JavaScript values in OCaml. For practical examples of binding
JavaScript libraries, see <<a_manual chapter="bindings"|Binding a JS library>>.

== Base types ==

Base values are not represented the same way in OCaml and Javascript.
In particular, OCaml strings are mutable arrays of bytes, while
Javascript strings are constant arrays of UTF-16 code points.  We list
here the correspondence between base types.  Conversion functions are
provided.

|= OCaml values |= Ocaml type of Javascript values |= Actual Javascript type |
| {{{int}}}     | {{{int}}}                        | Number                  |
| {{{float}}}   | {{{Js.number Js.t}}}             | Number                  |
| {{{bool}}}    | {{{bool Js.t}}}                  | Boolean                 |
| {{{string}}}  | {{{Js.js_string Js.t}}}          | String                  |
| {{{array}}}   | {{{Js.js_array Js.t}}}           | Array                   |

Integers are implemented as Javascript numbers and can be passed directly.
Other types require conversion functions. See <<a_manual chapter="bindings"|Type conversions>>
for the full list of conversion functions and examples.

== Typing Javascript objects ==

Javascript objects are given types of the shape
  {{{<m_1 : t_1; ...; m_n : t_n> Js.t}}},
using a phantom object type.  The methods {{{m_i}}} stands for the
field of the Javascript object.  For instance, a Javascript object of
type:
{{{
   < data : js_string t Js.prop;
     appendData : js_string t -> unit Js.meth> Js.t
}}}
has a property {{{data}}} containing a Javascript string, and a method
{{{appendData}}} taking a Javascript string as argument and returning
no value.

See <<a_manual chapter="bindings"|the bindings manual>>
for practical examples of defining class types.

== Nullable and optional values ==

JavaScript has two "missing value" types: {{{null}}} and {{{undefined}}}.
Js_of_ocaml represents these with distinct types:

* **{{{Js.Opt}}}** - For values that may be {{{null}}} (e.g., DOM lookups)
* **{{{Js.Optdef}}}** - For values that may be {{{undefined}}} (e.g., optional properties)

Both modules provide similar functions: {{{test}}}, {{{to_option}}}, {{{case}}},
{{{get}}}, {{{map}}}, {{{iter}}}, etc. See <<a_manual chapter="bindings"|Handling null and undefined>>
for practical examples and guidance on when to use each type.

=== Method name and underscore

Some overloading is possible using a syntactic trick: names
{{{_foo}}}, {{{foo_abcd}}} and {{{foo}}} are all mapped to a same
Javascript field name {{{foo}}}: when accessing a field of an object,
the name given in the OCaml code is transformed by removing a leading
underscore and then removing all characters starting from the last
underscore; this yields the corresponding Javascript name.  For
instance, these three types correspond to the same Javascript method
{{{drawImage}}}:
{{{
    drawImage :
        imageElement t -> number t -> number t -> unit meth
    drawImage_withSize :
        imageElement t -> number t -> number t -> number t -> number t -> unit meth
    drawImage_fromCanvas :
        canvasElement t -> number t -> number t -> unit meth
}}}
This trick can also be used to refer to Javascript fields {{{type}}} or
{{{Uppercase}}}, for instance as {{{_type}}} and {{{_Uppercase}}}.

==== Example

<<code language="ocaml"|
class type .. = object
  (* Refer to [meth] *)
  method meth : ..
  method meth_int : ..
  method _meth_ : ..
  method _meth_aa : ..

  (* Refer to  [meth_a] *)
  method meth_a_int : ..
  method _meth_a_ : ..
  method _meth_a_b : ..

  (* Refer to [Meth] *)
  method _Meth : ..

  (* Refer to [_meth] *)
  method __meth : ..

  (* Refer to [_] *)
  method __ : ..
end
>>

== Syntax extension ==

The <<a_manual chapter="ppx"|Ppx_js>> syntax extension provides convenient
syntax for accessing properties, calling methods, and creating objects.
See the PPX documentation for the full syntax reference.

== OCaml and Javascript functions ==

OCaml and Javascript do not follow the same calling convention.  In
OCaml, functions can be partially applied, returning a function
closure.  In Javascript, when only some of the parameters are passed,
the others are set to the {{{undefined}}} value.  As a consequence, it
is not possible to call a Javascript function from OCaml as if it was
an OCaml function, and conversely.


=== Calling Javascript functions ===

Use {{{Js.Unsafe.fun_call}}} to call a JavaScript function, or
{{{Js.Unsafe.call}}} if you need to bind {{{this}}} to a specific object.
Use {{{Js.Unsafe.meth_call}}} to call a method on an object.

See <<a_manual chapter="bindings"|the bindings manual>> for detailed examples.

You can also refer to a Javascript function using an OCaml external
declaration. Then, you need to write stub functions in C so that the
OCaml compiler accept the external declaration:

{{{
   Ocaml file:
      external foo : t1 -> t2 = "foo"
   C file:
      #include <stdlib.h>
      #define D(f) void f () { exit(1); }
      D(foo)
}}}
You can call this function as if it was an OCaml function, as the
Javascript function is appropriately wrapped by the system.

Refer to <<a_manual chapter="linker" |the linker manual>>
to link your program with JavaScript stubs.

== IO ==

The <<a_api subproject="js_of_ocaml"|module Js_of_ocaml.Json>> module allows one to marshal and unmarshal the
JavaScript representation of OCaml values into the corresponding JSON
string. The unmarshaling is unsafe in the same way the OCaml
{{{Marshal.from_string}}} function is.

Type-safe unmarshaling may be achieved with the
{{{deriving}}} library using either the optional {{{Json}}}
class or the {{{Pickle}}} class.

* The {{{Json}}} class uses a Json as external representation and does
  not preserve potential sharings in the data representation. See
  <<a_api subproject="js_of_ocaml"|module Deriving_Json>> for more information.
* The {{{Pickle}}} class uses a binary format as external
  representation and preserves sharings in the data representation.
