= Linking JavaScript code

This page covers how to link JavaScript files with js_of_ocaml, including
writing primitives and discovering runtime files.

== Overview

The js_of_ocaml compiler accepts JavaScript files on the command-line.
The main purpose is to provide (external) primitives needed by the bytecode program.

Most primitives from the standard library are already implemented and loaded
by default.

== Passing JavaScript files

Pass JavaScript files (must have ".js" extension) directly:

{{{
js_of_ocaml myruntime.js program.byte
}}}

== Finding runtime files

OCaml libraries often require JavaScript runtime files. These are discovered
using Findlib's {{{jsoo_runtime}}} variable.

=== List required runtime files

To list all JavaScript runtime files for a set of libraries:

{{{
ocamlfind query -format "%+(jsoo_runtime)" -r LIB1 LIB2 ... | grep -v "^$"
}}}

Example for **base** and **time_now**:

{{{
$ ocamlfind query -format "%+(jsoo_runtime)" -r base time_now | grep -v "^$"
~/.opam/4.14.0/lib/base/base_internalhash_types/runtime.js
~/.opam/4.14.0/lib/base/runtime.js
~/.opam/4.14.0/lib/time_now/runtime.js
}}}

=== Complete manual compilation example

{{{
$ export LIBS=base,time_now
$ ocamlfind ocamlc -package $LIBS -linkpkg main.ml -o main.byte
$ js_of_ocaml $(ocamlfind query -format "%+(jsoo_runtime)" -r $LIBS | grep -v "^$") main.byte
}}}

With **dune**, this is handled automatically.

== Writing JavaScript primitives

To provide missing primitives or override existing ones, create a JavaScript
file with annotated functions.

=== Annotation syntax

{{{
//Provides: primitive_name [const|mutable]
//Requires: other_primitive[,another_primitive]*
//Version: version_constraint[,version_constraint]*

function primitive_name(arg1, arg2) {
  // JavaScript implementation
}
}}}

=== Annotations explained

**{{{//Provides: name [modifier]}}}** - Declares a primitive:
* {{{const}}} - No side effects (pure function)
* {{{mutable}}} - No side effects, but return value may be affected by other primitives
* (no modifier) - May have side effects

**{{{//Requires: name1, name2}}}** - Lists primitives that must be loaded first

**{{{//Version: < 4.12.0}}}** - Optional OCaml version constraint (rarely needed)

All JavaScript code after a {{{//Provides}}} annotation belongs to that
primitive, until the next {{{//Provides}}}.

=== Example: custom primitive

{{{
//Provides: my_log_primitive
//Requires: caml_jsstring_of_string
function my_log_primitive(msg) {
  console.log(caml_jsstring_of_string(msg));
  return 0;  // Return unit
}
}}}

OCaml side:
<<code language="ocaml"|
external my_log : string -> unit = "my_log_primitive"

let () = my_log "Hello from OCaml!"
>>

=== Example: primitive with dependencies

{{{
//Provides: my_json_parse
//Requires: caml_jsstring_of_string, caml_js_to_string
function my_json_parse(str) {
  var js_str = caml_jsstring_of_string(str);
  return JSON.parse(js_str);
}
}}}

== Declaring runtime files in packages

=== Using jsoo_runtime (recommended)

In your package's META file, use the {{{jsoo_runtime}}} variable:

{{{
# mypackage/META
package "sublib" (
  directory = "subdir"
  jsoo_runtime = "runtime.js"
)
}}}

Files should be comma-separated and relative to the package directory.
By convention, use **runtime.js** for single files.

=== Dune integration

Dune automatically handles {{{jsoo_runtime}}} declarations. In your dune file:

{{{
(library
 (name mylib)
 (js_of_ocaml
  (javascript_files runtime.js)))
}}}

== Deprecated: linkopts(javascript)

Before dune's native js_of_ocaml support, the standard approach was to use
{{{linkopts(javascript)}}} in META files:

{{{
# Old approach - deprecated
package "sublib" (
  directory = "subdir"
  linkopts(javascript) = "+mypackage/sublib/runtime.js"
)
}}}

To list linkopts for libraries:
{{{
ocamlfind query -o-format -r -predicates javascript LIB1 LIB2 ...
}}}

=== Findlib path syntax (deprecated)

When using linkopts, special path syntax is supported:
* {{{+package/file.js}}} - Resolves to {{{${LIBDIR}/package/file.js}}}
* {{{+file.js}}} - Resolves to js_of_ocaml-compiler's lib directory

**Note**: Dune generates META files compatible with both approaches but only
uses {{{jsoo_runtime}}} internally.

== See also

* <<a_manual chapter="separate-compilation"|Separate compilation>>
* <<a_manual chapter="options"|Command-line options>>
