= Targeting older browsers

Js_of_ocaml's generated code and runtime target **ECMAScript 2020 (ES2020)**.
Out of the box, the output runs on Node.js 16+ and any evergreen browser
released since early 2020 (Chrome 80+, Firefox 74+, Safari 13.4+, Edge 80+).

If you need to support an older engine, you can post-process the
generated JavaScript with [[https://babeljs.io|Babel]] and ship
polyfills with [[https://github.com/zloirock/core-js|core-js]].
Js_of_ocaml has no built-in downleveling.

==@@id="babel-recipe"@@ Transpiling with Babel

Install Babel and core-js:

{{{
npm install --save-dev @babel/core @babel/cli @babel/preset-env
npm install core-js
}}}

Create a {{{babel.config.json}}} next to your build:

<<code language="json"|
{
  "presets": [
    ["@babel/preset-env", {
      "targets": "> 0.5%, last 2 versions, not dead",
      "useBuiltIns": "usage",
      "corejs": "3.37"
    }]
  ]
}
>>

Set {{{targets}}} to the
[[https://github.com/browserslist/browserslist|browserslist query]]
matching the engines you need to support.

Compile your program with js_of_ocaml, then run Babel on the output:

{{{
js_of_ocaml --target-env=browser program.byte -o program.js
npx babel program.js -o program.es5.js
}}}

{{{--target-env=browser}}} keeps the runtime from pulling in Node-only
branches, which would otherwise fail to resolve when bundling.

The resulting {{{program.es5.js}}} imports polyfills from {{{core-js}}}
with {{{require("core-js/modules/...")}}} calls. Before shipping to a
browser you need to bundle it so those imports are resolved and inlined.

==@@id="bundling"@@ Bundling

Any JavaScript bundler will work; [[https://esbuild.github.io|esbuild]]
is a small, zero-config option:

{{{
npm install --save-dev esbuild
npx esbuild program.es5.js --bundle --platform=browser \
  --outfile=program.bundle.js
}}}

Esbuild preserves whatever ES level Babel produced; it just resolves
{{{require}}} calls and concatenates modules.

Ship {{{program.bundle.js}}} as a single script; no additional polyfills
are required at load time.

==@@id="dune"@@ With dune

You can wire Babel into your dune rules so it runs automatically:

{{{
(rule
 (targets program.es5.js)
 (deps program.bc.js babel.config.json)
 (action
  (run npx babel %{dep:program.bc.js} -o %{targets})))
}}}

==@@id="caveats"@@ Caveats

* **Code size**: polyfills and transpiled helpers add a non-trivial amount of
  JavaScript. Expect the output to be noticeably larger.
* **Performance**: transpiled code tends to run slower than the original
  ES2020 output, especially the further back you target.
* **Source maps**: pass {{{--source-map}}} to js_of_ocaml and {{{--source-maps}}}
  to Babel to keep a mapping back to the OCaml source. Babel will chain the
  source map through if one is present alongside its input.
* **Weak references**: core-js does not polyfill {{{WeakRef}}} faithfully.
  On engines without native {{{WeakRef}}}, {{{Stdlib.Weak}}} and
  {{{Stdlib.Ephemeron}}} behave as strong references — values held by them
  will not be collected.
* **Wasm_of_ocaml**: targeting older browsers is not possible with
  {{{wasm_of_ocaml}}}, which requires a WebAssembly GC-capable engine.

==@@id="see-also"@@ See also

* <<a_manual chapter="options"|Command line options>> — compiler flags
* <<a_manual chapter="install"|Installation>> — supported engines
