= Link with JavaScript code
The Js_of_ocaml compiler accepts JavaScript files provided on the command-line.
The main purpose is to provide (external) primitives needed by the bytecode program.

Most of the primitives from the standard library are already implemented and loaded by default.

== Command-line
Pass the JavaScript file (must have a ".js" extension)
<<code |
js_of_ocaml jsfile.js a.byte
>>

See the <<a_manual chapter="runtime-files" |runtime files>> chapter for how to
discover runtime files.

== Provide your own JavaScript
You may need to provide extra JavaScript files to provide missing primitives or to override existing ones.
Primitive code must be annotated with the primitive name and primitive requirements.
The linker uses these information to only include the primitive actually used in the program and to perform better deadcode elimination.

===Syntax
{{{
//Provides: primitive_name [const|mutable]
//Requires: primitive_name[,primitive_name]*
//Version: version_constraint[,version_constraint]*

function primitive_name(..){
 ... JavaScript code ...
}
}}}
 * **{{{//Provides}}}** is used to declare a primitive; an annotation
   can be used to specify the possible side-effects of the primitive:
   **const** means no side-effect; **mutable** indicates that the
   primitive has no side-effect but that other primitives might affect
   the returned value of the primitive; when no annotation is provided,
   the linker assumes that the primitive may have side-effects.
 * **{{{//Requires}}}** is used if other primitives need to be loaded first
 * **version_constraint** looks like "{{{< 4.12.0}}}"
 * **{{{//Version}}}** is optional and is rarely used
All JavaScript code following a **{{{//Provides}}}** annotation is associated to this annotation, until the next **{{{//Provides}}}** annotation.
